Designation of Persons by Fours (Catukkapuggalapaññatti)

132. Which person is a bad person (asappurisa)? Here some person kills living beings, takes what is not given, engages in sexual misconduct, speaks falsely, and is given to liquor, wine, and intoxicants that are a basis for negligence — this is the person called "a bad person."

133. Which person is worse than a bad person? Here some person himself kills living beings and also encourages another to kill; himself takes what is not given and encourages another to take what is not given; himself engages in sexual misconduct and encourages another in sexual misconduct; himself speaks falsely and encourages another in false speech; himself is given to liquor, wine, and intoxicants that are a basis for negligence, and encourages another in liquor, wine, and intoxicants that are a basis for negligence — this is the person called "one worse than a bad person."

134. Which person is a good person (sappurisa)? Here some person abstains from killing living beings, abstains from taking what is not given, abstains from sexual misconduct, abstains from false speech, abstains from liquor, wine, and intoxicants that are a basis for negligence — this is the person called "a good person."

135. Which person is better than a good person? Here some person himself abstains from killing living beings and also encourages another in abstaining from killing living beings; himself abstains from taking what is not given and encourages another in abstaining from taking what is not given; himself abstains from sexual misconduct and encourages another in abstaining from sexual misconduct; himself abstains from false speech and encourages another in abstaining from false speech; himself abstains from liquor, wine, and intoxicants that are a basis for negligence, and encourages another in abstaining from liquor, wine, and intoxicants that are a basis for negligence — this is the person called "one better than a good person."

136. Which person is evil (pāpa)? Here some person kills living beings, takes what is not given, engages in sexual misconduct, speaks falsely, speaks divisively, speaks harshly, chatters idly, is covetous, is malevolent in mind, and is of wrong view (micchādiṭṭhi) — this is the person called "evil."

137. Which person is more evil than an evil person? Here some person himself kills living beings and encourages another to kill; himself takes what is not given and encourages another to take what is not given; himself engages in sexual misconduct and encourages another in sexual misconduct; himself speaks falsely and encourages another in false speech; himself speaks divisively and encourages another in divisive speech; himself speaks harshly and encourages another in harsh speech; himself chatters idly and encourages another in idle chatter; himself is covetous and encourages another in covetousness; himself is malevolent in mind and encourages another in ill will; himself is of wrong view and encourages another in wrong view — this is the person called "one more evil than an evil person."

138. Which person is fine (kalyāṇa)? Here some person abstains from killing living beings, abstains from taking what is not given, abstains from sexual misconduct, abstains from false speech, abstains from divisive speech, abstains from harsh speech, abstains from idle chatter, is uncovetous, is unmalevolent in mind, and is of right view (sammādiṭṭhi) — this is the person called "fine."

139. Which person is finer than a fine person? Here some person himself abstains from killing living beings and encourages another in abstaining from killing living beings; himself abstains from taking what is not given and encourages another in abstaining from taking what is not given; himself abstains from sexual misconduct and encourages another in abstaining from sexual misconduct; himself abstains from false speech and encourages another in abstaining from false speech; himself abstains from divisive speech and encourages another in abstaining from divisive speech; himself abstains from harsh speech and encourages another in abstaining from harsh speech; himself abstains from idle chatter and encourages another in abstaining from idle chatter; himself is uncovetous and encourages another in non-covetousness; himself is unmalevolent in mind and encourages another in non-ill-will; himself is of right view and encourages another in right view — this is the person called "one finer than a fine person."

140. Which person is of evil character (pāpadhamma)? Here some person kills living beings, takes what is not given … [and so on] … is of wrong view — this is the person called "one of evil character."

141. Which person is of more evil character than one of evil character? Here some person himself kills living beings and encourages another to kill; himself takes what is not given and encourages another to take what is not given … [and so on] … himself is of wrong view and encourages another in wrong view — this is the person called "one of more evil character than one of evil character."

142. Which person is of fine character (kalyāṇadhamma)? Here some person abstains from killing living beings, abstains from taking what is not given … [and so on] … is of right view — this is the person called "one of fine character."

143. Which person is of finer character than one of fine character? Here some person himself abstains from killing living beings and encourages another in abstaining from killing living beings … [and so on] … himself is of right view and encourages another in right view — this is the person called "one of finer character than one of fine character."

144. Which person is blameworthy (sāvajja)? Here some person is possessed of blameworthy bodily kamma, possessed of blameworthy verbal kamma, possessed of blameworthy mental kamma — this is the person called "blameworthy."

145. Which person is of much fault? Here some person is possessed of much blameworthy bodily kamma and little blameless; possessed of much blameworthy verbal kamma and little blameless; possessed of much blameworthy mental kamma and little blameless — this is the person called "one of much fault."

146. Which person is of little fault? Here some person is possessed of much blameless bodily kamma and little blameworthy; possessed of much blameless verbal kamma and little blameworthy; possessed of much blameless mental kamma and little blameworthy — this is the person called "one of little fault."

147. Which person is blameless (anavajja)? Here some person is possessed of blameless bodily kamma, possessed of blameless verbal kamma, possessed of blameless mental kamma — this is the person called "blameless."

148. Which person is one who understands at the very utterance (ugghaṭitaññū)? The person for whom the breakthrough to the dhamma comes together with the moment of utterance — this is the person called "one who understands at the very utterance."

149. Which person is one who understands through elaboration (vipañcitaññū)? The person for whom the breakthrough to the dhamma comes when the meaning of what was stated in brief is analyzed in detail — this is the person called "one who understands through elaboration."

150. Which person is one to be guided (neyya)? The person for whom, by way of recitation, questioning, careful attention (yoniso manasikāra), and resorting to, associating with, and attending closely upon good friends (kalyāṇamitta), the breakthrough to the dhamma comes thus, gradually — this is the person called "one to be guided."

151. Which person is one for whom the word is the most he gets (padaparama)? The person for whom, though he hears much, recites much, retains much, and expounds much, there is no breakthrough to the dhamma in that very life — this is the person called "one for whom the word is the most he gets."

152. Which person is apt in ready reply but not quick? Here some person, when asked a question, says what is apt but not quickly — this is the person called "apt in ready reply but not quick."

153. Which person is quick in ready reply but not apt? Here some person, when asked a question, says it quickly but not aptly — this is the person called "quick in ready reply but not apt."

154. Which person is both apt and quick in ready reply? Here some person, when asked a question, says what is apt and says it quickly — this is the person called "both apt and quick in ready reply."

155. Which person is neither apt nor quick in ready reply? Here some person, when asked a question, neither says what is apt nor says it quickly — this is the person called "neither apt nor quick in ready reply."

156. Therein, which are the four persons who are speakers on the dhamma (dhammakathika)? Here some speaker on the dhamma speaks little and incoherently, and his assembly is not skilled in what is coherent and incoherent: such a speaker, before such an assembly, is reckoned simply as "a speaker on the dhamma." Here another speaker on the dhamma speaks little but coherently, and his assembly is skilled in what is coherent and incoherent: such a speaker, before such an assembly, is reckoned simply as "a speaker on the dhamma." Here another speaker on the dhamma speaks much but incoherently, and his assembly is not skilled in what is coherent and incoherent: such a speaker, before such an assembly, is reckoned simply as "a speaker on the dhamma." Here another speaker on the dhamma speaks much and coherently, and his assembly is skilled in what is coherent and incoherent: such a speaker, before such an assembly, is reckoned simply as "a speaker on the dhamma." These are the four "speakers on the dhamma."

157. Therein, which are the four persons similar to a thundercloud? There are four thunderclouds: one that thunders but does not rain, one that rains but does not thunder, one that both thunders and rains, and one that neither thunders nor rains. Just so, there are these four persons similar to a thundercloud found existing in the world. What four? One who thunders but does not rain, one who rains but does not thunder, one who both thunders and rains, and one who neither thunders nor rains. And how is a person one who thunders but does not rain? Here some person is a speaker but not a doer: thus a person thunders but does not rain. Just as that thundercloud thunders but does not rain, so is this person. And how is a person one who rains but does not thunder? Here some person is a doer but not a speaker: thus a person rains but does not thunder. Just as that thundercloud rains but does not thunder, so is this person. And how is a person one who both thunders and rains? Here some person is both a speaker and a doer: thus a person both thunders and rains. Just as that thundercloud both thunders and rains, so is this person. And how is a person one who neither thunders nor rains? Here some person is neither a speaker nor a doer: thus a person neither thunders nor rains. Just as that thundercloud neither thunders nor rains, so is this person. These are the four persons similar to a thundercloud found existing in the world.

158. Therein, which are the four persons similar to a mouse? There are four mice: one that makes a hole but does not dwell in it, one that dwells but does not make a hole, one that both makes a hole and dwells, and one that neither makes a hole nor dwells. Just so, there are these four persons similar to a mouse found existing in the world. What four? One who makes a hole but does not dwell, one who dwells but does not make a hole, one who both makes a hole and dwells, and one who neither makes a hole nor dwells. And how is a person one who makes a hole but does not dwell? Here some person masters the dhamma — the discourses (sutta), the mixed prose-and-verse (geyya), the expositions (veyyākaraṇa), the verses (gāthā), the inspired utterances (udāna), the thus-said sayings (itivuttaka), the birth-stories (jātaka), the marvels (abbhutadhamma), and the catechisms (vedalla) — but he does not understand as it really is, "This is dukkha"; he does not understand as it really is, "This is the origin of dukkha"; he does not understand as it really is, "This is the cessation of dukkha"; he does not understand as it really is, "This is the way leading to the cessation of dukkha." Thus a person makes a hole but does not dwell. Just as that mouse makes a hole but does not dwell, so is this person. And how is a person one who dwells but does not make a hole? Here some person does not master the dhamma — the discourses, the mixed prose-and-verse, the expositions, the verses, the inspired utterances, the thus-said sayings, the birth-stories, the marvels, and the catechisms — yet he understands as it really is, "This is dukkha"; he understands as it really is, "This is the origin of dukkha"; he understands as it really is, "This is the cessation of dukkha"; he understands as it really is, "This is the way leading to the cessation of dukkha." Thus a person dwells but does not make a hole. Just as that mouse dwells but does not make a hole, so is this person. And how is a person one who both makes a hole and dwells? Here some person both masters the dhamma — the discourses … the catechisms — and understands as it really is, "This is dukkha" … "This is the way leading to the cessation of dukkha." Thus a person both makes a hole and dwells. Just as that mouse both makes a hole and dwells, so is this person. And how is a person one who neither makes a hole nor dwells? Here some person neither masters the dhamma — the discourses … the catechisms — nor understands as it really is, "This is dukkha" … "This is the way leading to the cessation of dukkha." Thus a person neither makes a hole nor dwells. Just as that mouse neither makes a hole nor dwells, so is this person. These are the four persons similar to a mouse found existing in the world.

159. Therein, which are the four persons similar to a mango? There are four mangoes: one unripe but of ripe appearance, one ripe but of unripe appearance, one unripe and of unripe appearance, and one ripe and of ripe appearance. Just so, there are these four persons similar to a mango found existing in the world. What four? One unripe but of ripe appearance, one ripe but of unripe appearance, one unripe and of unripe appearance, and one ripe and of ripe appearance. And how is a person unripe but of ripe appearance? Some person's going forward and going back, looking ahead and looking aside, bending and stretching, and bearing of the outer robe, bowl, and robes is pleasing; yet he does not understand as it really is, "This is dukkha" … "This is the way leading to the cessation of dukkha." Thus a person is unripe but of ripe appearance. Just as that mango is unripe but of ripe appearance, so is this person. And how is a person ripe but of unripe appearance? Some person's going forward and going back, looking ahead and looking aside, bending and stretching, and bearing of the outer robe, bowl, and robes is not pleasing; yet he understands as it really is, "This is dukkha" … "This is the way leading to the cessation of dukkha." Thus a person is ripe but of unripe appearance. Just as that mango is ripe but of unripe appearance, so is this person. And how is a person unripe and of unripe appearance? Some person's comportment is not pleasing, and he does not understand as it really is, "This is dukkha" … "This is the way leading to the cessation of dukkha." Thus a person is unripe and of unripe appearance. Just as that mango is unripe and of unripe appearance, so is this person. And how is a person ripe and of ripe appearance? Some person's comportment is pleasing, and he understands as it really is, "This is dukkha" … "This is the way leading to the cessation of dukkha." Thus a person is ripe and of ripe appearance. Just as that mango is ripe and of ripe appearance, so is this person. These are the four persons similar to a mango found existing in the world.

160. Therein, which are the four persons similar to a water-jar? There are four water-jars: one empty and closed, one full and open, one empty and open, and one full and closed. Just so, there are these four persons similar to a water-jar found existing in the world. What four? One empty and closed, one full and open, one empty and open, and one full and closed. And how is a person empty and closed? Some person's comportment is pleasing, yet he does not understand as it really is, "This is dukkha" … "This is the way leading to the cessation of dukkha." Thus a person is empty and closed. Just as that water-jar is empty and closed, so is this person. And how is a person full and open? Some person's comportment is not pleasing, yet he understands as it really is, "This is dukkha" … "This is the way leading to the cessation of dukkha." Thus a person is full and open. Just as that water-jar is full and open, so is this person. And how is a person empty and open? Some person's comportment is not pleasing, and he does not understand as it really is, "This is dukkha" … "This is the way leading to the cessation of dukkha." Thus a person is empty and open. Just as that water-jar is empty and open, so is this person. And how is a person full and closed? Some person's comportment is pleasing, and he understands as it really is, "This is dukkha" … "This is the way leading to the cessation of dukkha." Thus a person is full and closed. Just as that water-jar is full and closed, so is this person. These are the four persons similar to a water-jar found existing in the world.

161. Therein, which are the four persons similar to a pool of water? There are four pools of water: one shallow but of deep appearance, one deep but of shallow appearance, one shallow and of shallow appearance, and one deep and of deep appearance. Just so, there are these four persons similar to a pool of water found existing in the world. What four? One shallow but of deep appearance, one deep but of shallow appearance, one shallow and of shallow appearance, and one deep and of deep appearance. And how is a person shallow but of deep appearance? Some person's comportment is pleasing, yet he does not understand as it really is, "This is dukkha" … "This is the way leading to the cessation of dukkha." Thus a person is shallow but of deep appearance. Just as that pool is shallow but of deep appearance, so is this person. And how is a person deep but of shallow appearance? Some person's comportment is not pleasing, yet he understands as it really is, "This is dukkha" … "This is the way leading to the cessation of dukkha." Thus a person is deep but of shallow appearance. Just as that pool is deep but of shallow appearance, so is this person. And how is a person shallow and of shallow appearance? Some person's comportment is not pleasing, and he does not understand as it really is, "This is dukkha" … "This is the way leading to the cessation of dukkha." Thus a person is shallow and of shallow appearance. Just as that pool is shallow and of shallow appearance, so is this person. And how is a person deep and of deep appearance? Some person's comportment is pleasing, and he understands as it really is, "This is dukkha" … "This is the way leading to the cessation of dukkha." Thus a person is deep and of deep appearance. Just as that pool is deep and of deep appearance, so is this person. These are the four persons similar to a pool of water found existing in the world.

162. Therein, which are the four persons similar to an ox? There are four oxen: one fierce toward its own herd but not toward another's, one fierce toward another's herd but not its own, one fierce toward both its own herd and another's, and one fierce toward neither its own herd nor another's. Just so, there are these four persons similar to an ox found existing in the world. What four? One fierce toward his own but not toward another's, one fierce toward another's but not his own, one fierce toward both, and one fierce toward neither. And how is a person fierce toward his own but not toward another's? Here some person terrifies his own assembly but not another's assembly: thus a person is fierce toward his own but not toward another's. Just as that ox is fierce toward its own herd but not toward another's, so is this person. And how is a person fierce toward another's but not his own? Here some person terrifies another's assembly but not his own: thus a person is fierce toward another's but not his own. Just as that ox is fierce toward another's herd but not its own, so is this person. And how is a person fierce toward both his own and another's? Here some person terrifies both his own assembly and another's: thus a person is fierce toward both. Just as that ox is fierce toward both its own herd and another's, so is this person. And how is a person fierce toward neither his own nor another's? Here some person terrifies neither his own assembly nor another's: thus a person is fierce toward neither. Just as that ox is fierce toward neither its own herd nor another's, so is this person. These are the four persons similar to an ox found existing in the world.

163. Therein, which are the four persons similar to a viper? There are four vipers: one of swift-striking venom but not deadly venom, one of deadly venom but not swift-striking, one of both swift-striking and deadly venom, and one of neither swift-striking nor deadly venom. Just so, there are these four persons similar to a viper found existing in the world. What four? One of swift-striking venom but not deadly, one of deadly venom but not swift-striking, one of both, and one of neither. And how is a person of swift-striking venom but not deadly? Here some person frequently becomes angry, but his anger does not linger long; thus a person is of swift-striking venom but not deadly. Just as that viper is of swift-striking venom but not deadly, so is this person. And how is a person of deadly venom but not swift-striking? Here some person does not frequently become angry, but his anger lingers long; thus a person is of deadly venom but not swift-striking. Just as that viper is of deadly venom but not swift-striking, so is this person. And how is a person of both swift-striking and deadly venom? Here some person frequently becomes angry, and his anger lingers long; thus a person is of both swift-striking and deadly venom. Just as that viper is of both swift-striking and deadly venom, so is this person. And how is a person of neither swift-striking nor deadly venom? Here some person does not frequently become angry, and his anger does not linger long; thus a person is of neither swift-striking nor deadly venom. Just as that viper is of neither swift-striking nor deadly venom, so is this person. These are the four persons similar to a viper found existing in the world.

164. And how is a person one who, without investigating and without fathoming, speaks praise of what does not deserve praise? Here some person speaks praise of wrongly-practicing, wrongly-faring sectarians (titthiya) and disciples of sectarians: "they are well practiced," "they are rightly practiced." Thus a person, without investigating and without fathoming, speaks praise of what does not deserve praise. And how is a person one who, without investigating and without fathoming, speaks dispraise of what deserves praise? Here some person speaks dispraise of well-practicing, rightly-practicing buddhas and disciples of the Buddha: "they are wrongly practiced," "they are wrongly faring." Thus a person, without investigating and without fathoming, speaks dispraise of what deserves praise. And how is a person one who, without investigating and without fathoming, shows confidence in a case that does not warrant confidence? Here some person generates confidence in a wrong practice, a mistaken practice: "it is a good practice," "it is a right practice." Thus a person, without investigating and without fathoming, shows confidence in a case that does not warrant confidence. And how is a person one who, without investigating and without fathoming, shows lack of confidence in a case that warrants confidence? Here some person generates lack of confidence in a good practice, a right practice: "it is a wrong practice," "it is a mistaken practice." Thus a person, without investigating and without fathoming, shows lack of confidence in a case that warrants confidence.

165. And how is a person one who, having investigated and having fathomed, speaks dispraise of what deserves dispraise? Here some person speaks dispraise of wrongly-practicing, wrongly-faring sectarians and disciples of sectarians: "they are wrongly practiced," "they are wrongly faring." Thus a person, having investigated and having fathomed, speaks dispraise of what deserves dispraise. And how is a person one who, having investigated and having fathomed, speaks praise of what deserves praise? Here some person speaks praise of well-practicing, rightly-practicing buddhas and disciples of the Buddha: "they are well practiced," "they are rightly practiced." Thus a person, having investigated and having fathomed, speaks praise of what deserves praise. And how is a person one who, having investigated and having fathomed, shows lack of confidence in a case that does not warrant confidence? Here some person generates lack of confidence in a wrong practice, a mistaken practice: "it is a wrong practice," "it is a mistaken practice." Thus a person, having investigated and having fathomed, shows lack of confidence in a case that does not warrant confidence. And how is a person one who, having investigated and having fathomed, shows confidence in a case that warrants confidence? Here some person generates confidence in a good practice, a right practice: "it is a good practice," "it is a right practice." Thus a person, having investigated and having fathomed, shows confidence in a case that warrants confidence.

166. And how is a person one who speaks dispraise of what deserves dispraise — true, factual, and at the right time — but does not speak praise of what deserves praise, true, factual, and at the right time? Here in some person both praiseworthy and blameworthy qualities are found. The blame that is there, that he utters — true, factual, and at the right time; the praise that is there, that he does not utter — true, factual, and at the right time. Thus a person speaks dispraise of what deserves dispraise, true, factual, and at the right time, but does not speak praise of what deserves praise, true, factual, and at the right time. And how is a person one who speaks praise of what deserves praise — true, factual, and at the right time — but does not speak dispraise of what deserves dispraise, true, factual, and at the right time? Here in some person both praiseworthy and blameworthy qualities are found. The praise that is there, that he utters — true, factual, and at the right time; the blame that is there, that he does not utter — true, factual, and at the right time. Thus a person speaks praise of what deserves praise, true, factual, and at the right time, but does not speak dispraise of what deserves dispraise, true, factual, and at the right time. And how is a person one who speaks both the dispraise of what deserves dispraise — true, factual, and at the right time — and the praise of what deserves praise, true, factual, and at the right time? Here in some person both praiseworthy and blameworthy qualities are found. The blame that is there, that he utters — true, factual, and at the right time; and the praise that is there, that too he utters — true, factual, and at the right time. Therein he knows the right time for answering that matter. Thus a person speaks both the dispraise of what deserves dispraise and the praise of what deserves praise, true, factual, and at the right time. And how is a person one who speaks neither the dispraise of what deserves dispraise — true, factual, and at the right time — nor the praise of what deserves praise, true, factual, and at the right time? Here in some person both praiseworthy and blameworthy qualities are found. The blame that is there, that he does not utter — true, factual, and at the right time; and the praise that is there, that too he does not utter — true, factual, and at the right time. He dwells in upekkhā, with sati and sampajañña. Thus a person speaks neither the dispraise of what deserves dispraise nor the praise of what deserves praise, true, factual, and at the right time.

167. And which person lives on the fruit of exertion, not on the fruit of merit? The person whose livelihood is produced by standing up, applying himself, and striving, not by merit — this is the person called "one who lives on the fruit of exertion, not on the fruit of merit." And which person lives on the fruit of merit, not on the fruit of exertion? The devas who wield power over others' creations (Paranimmitavasavattī) and upward: those devas live on the fruit of merit, not on the fruit of exertion. And which person lives on both the fruit of exertion and the fruit of merit? The person whose livelihood is produced both by standing up, applying himself, and striving, and by merit — this is the person called "one who lives on both the fruit of exertion and the fruit of merit." And which person lives on neither the fruit of exertion nor the fruit of merit? The hell-beings live on neither the fruit of exertion nor the fruit of merit.

168. And how is a person in darkness, bound for darkness? Here some person is reborn in a low family — an outcaste family (caṇḍāla), a family of hunters, of bamboo-workers, of cart-makers, or of refuse-scavengers (pukkusa) — poor, with little food and drink, of hard livelihood, where food and clothing are got with difficulty. And he is ill-favored, ugly, dwarfish, sickly — blind, or crippled, or lame, or paralyzed — and gets no food, drink, clothing, vehicle, garlands, scents, and unguents, no bed, dwelling, or lamp. He conducts himself badly in body, badly in speech, badly in mind. Having conducted himself badly in body, speech, and mind, with the breakup of the body, after death, he is reborn in a state of deprivation, a bad destination, the abyss, hell. Thus a person is in darkness, bound for darkness. And how is a person in darkness, bound for light? Here some person is reborn in a low family — an outcaste family … of refuse-scavengers — poor … where food and clothing are got with difficulty; and he is ill-favored … gets no bed, dwelling, or lamp. But he conducts himself well in body, well in speech, well in mind. Having conducted himself well in body, speech, and mind, with the breakup of the body, after death, he is reborn in a good destination, a heavenly world. Thus a person is in darkness, bound for light. And how is a person in light, bound for darkness? Here some person is reborn in a high family — a wealthy khattiya family, a wealthy brāhmaṇa family, or a wealthy householder (gahapati) family — affluent, of great wealth and great property, with abundant gold and silver, abundant means and resources, abundant wealth and grain. And he is handsome, comely, graceful, endowed with supreme beauty of complexion, and gets food, drink, clothing, vehicle, garlands, scents, and unguents, bed, dwelling, and lamp. But he conducts himself badly in body, badly in speech, badly in mind. Having conducted himself badly in body, speech, and mind, with the breakup of the body, after death, he is reborn in a state of deprivation, a bad destination, the abyss, hell. Thus a person is in light, bound for darkness. And how is a person in light, bound for light? Here some person is reborn in a high family — a wealthy khattiya family … abundant wealth and grain; and he is handsome … gets bed, dwelling, and lamp. And he conducts himself well in body, well in speech, well in mind. Having conducted himself well in body, speech, and mind, with the breakup of the body, after death, he is reborn in a good destination, a heavenly world. Thus a person is in light, bound for light.

169. And how is a person low and bound to remain low? … [as above] … thus a person is low and bound to remain low. And how is a person low but bound to rise? … thus a person is low but bound to rise. And how is a person high but bound to sink? … thus a person is high but bound to sink. And how is a person high and bound to remain high? … thus a person is high and bound to remain high. [This tetrad — the low or high in standing who decline or rise — is given only in abbreviated form (peyyāla) in the source, on the pattern of §168.]

170. Therein, which are the four persons similar to a tree? There are four trees: sapwood surrounded by heartwood, heartwood surrounded by sapwood, sapwood surrounded by sapwood, and heartwood surrounded by heartwood. Just so, there are these four persons similar to a tree found existing in the world. What four? Sapwood surrounded by heartwood, heartwood surrounded by sapwood, sapwood surrounded by sapwood, and heartwood surrounded by heartwood. And how is a person sapwood surrounded by heartwood? Here some person is unvirtuous, of evil character, but his following is virtuous, of fine character. Thus a person is sapwood surrounded by heartwood. Just as that tree is sapwood surrounded by heartwood, so is this person. And how is a person heartwood surrounded by sapwood? Here some person is virtuous, of fine character, but his following is unvirtuous, of evil character. Thus a person is heartwood surrounded by sapwood. Just as that tree is heartwood surrounded by sapwood, so is this person. And how is a person sapwood surrounded by sapwood? Here some person is unvirtuous, of evil character, and his following too is unvirtuous, of evil character. Thus a person is sapwood surrounded by sapwood. Just as that tree is sapwood surrounded by sapwood, so is this person. And how is a person heartwood surrounded by heartwood? Here some person is virtuous, of fine character, and his following too is virtuous, of fine character. Thus a person is heartwood surrounded by heartwood. Just as that tree is heartwood surrounded by heartwood, so is this person. These are the four persons similar to a tree found existing in the world.

171. And which person takes outward form as his measure and gains confidence through outward form? Here some person, on seeing height, or girth, or shape, or completeness of form, takes his measure there and generates confidence. This is the person called "one who takes outward form as his measure and gains confidence through outward form." And which person takes voice as his measure and gains confidence through voice? Here some person, through another's commending, another's lauding, another's praising, another's extolling, takes his measure there and generates confidence. This is the person called "one who takes voice as his measure and gains confidence through voice."

172. And which person takes austerity as his measure and gains confidence through austerity? Here some person, on seeing a coarse robe, or a coarse bowl, or a coarse lodging, or some difficult practice, takes his measure there and generates confidence. This is the person called "one who takes austerity as his measure and gains confidence through austerity." And which person takes dhamma as his measure and gains confidence through dhamma? Here some person, on seeing sīla, or samādhi, or paññā, takes his measure there and generates confidence. This is the person called "one who takes dhamma as his measure and gains confidence through dhamma."

173. And how is a person one practicing for his own welfare but not the welfare of others? Here some person is himself accomplished in sīla but does not encourage another in the attainment of sīla; himself accomplished in samādhi but does not encourage another in the attainment of samādhi; himself accomplished in paññā but does not encourage another in the attainment of paññā; himself accomplished in liberation (vimutti) but does not encourage another in the attainment of liberation; himself accomplished in the knowledge and vision of liberation (vimuttiñāṇadassana) but does not encourage another in the attainment of the knowledge and vision of liberation. Thus a person practices for his own welfare but not the welfare of others. And how is a person one practicing for the welfare of others but not his own? Here some person is himself not accomplished in sīla but encourages another in the attainment of sīla; himself not accomplished in samādhi … in paññā … in liberation … in the knowledge and vision of liberation, but encourages another in their attainment. Thus a person practices for the welfare of others but not his own. And how is a person one practicing both for his own welfare and the welfare of others? Here some person is himself accomplished in sīla and also encourages another in the attainment of sīla; himself accomplished in samādhi … in paññā … in liberation … in the knowledge and vision of liberation, and also encourages another in their attainment. Thus a person practices both for his own welfare and the welfare of others. And how is a person one practicing neither for his own welfare nor the welfare of others? Here some person is himself not accomplished in sīla and does not encourage another in the attainment of sīla; himself not accomplished in samādhi … in paññā … in liberation … in the knowledge and vision of liberation, and does not encourage another in their attainment. Thus a person practices neither for his own welfare nor the welfare of others.

174. And how is a person a self-tormentor, given to the practice of tormenting himself? Here some person is a naked ascetic, of loose habits, one who licks his hands, who does not come when told "come, venerable," who does not stand still when told "stand, venerable," who accepts neither food brought to him, nor food specially prepared, nor an invitation. He accepts nothing from the mouth of a pot or the mouth of a basket; nothing across a threshold, across a stick, or across a pestle; nothing from two people eating together, from a pregnant woman, from a nursing woman, or from a woman gone in among men; nothing from food collected in a drive, from where a dog stands waiting, or from where flies swarm. He takes no fish, no meat, drinks no liquor, no wine, no fermented gruel. He keeps to one house, one morsel; to two houses, two morsels … up to seven houses, seven morsels. He sustains himself on one small dole, on two doles … up to seven doles. He takes food once a day, once in two days … up to once in seven days; and thus he dwells given to the practice of taking food at intervals up to half a month. He eats greens, or millet, or wild rice, or scraps of hide, or moss, or rice-husk powder, or rice-scum, or sesame flour, or grass, or cow-dung; he keeps himself on forest roots and fruits and eats fallen fruit. He wears coarse hemp, mixed hemp, shrouds, rags from a dust-heap, tree-bark; antelope hide, strips of antelope hide; a garment of kusa-grass, a garment of bark-fiber, a garment of wood-shavings; a blanket of human hair, a blanket of animal hair, owls' wings. He is a hair-and-beard plucker, given to the practice of pulling out hair and beard; a continual stander, refusing a seat; a squatter, given to the exertion of squatting; a thorn-bed user, who makes his bed on thorns; and given to the practice of descending into water three times a day, including in the evening. Thus, in many such ways, he dwells given to the practice of scorching and tormenting the body. Thus a person is a self-tormentor, given to the practice of tormenting himself.

175. And how is a person a tormentor of others, given to the practice of tormenting others? Here some person is a slaughterer of sheep, a slaughterer of pigs, a fowler, a deer-hunter, a trapper, a fisherman, a thief, an executioner, a cattle-butcher, a jailer, or whoever else follows such a cruel trade. Thus a person is a tormentor of others, given to the practice of tormenting others.

176. And how is a person both a self-tormentor, given to the practice of tormenting himself, and a tormentor of others, given to the practice of tormenting others? Here some person is a head-anointed khattiya king, or a wealthy brāhmaṇa. Having had a new sacrificial hall built to the east of the city, and having shaved off hair and beard, clothed himself in a rough antelope hide, anointed his body with ghee and oil, and scratching his back with a deer's horn, he enters the sacrificial hall together with his chief queen and the brāhmaṇa high priest. There he makes his bed on the bare ground smeared with green cow-dung. From a single cow with a calf of like color, the king sustains himself on the milk from one teat, the queen on the milk from the second teat, the brāhmaṇa high priest on the milk from the third teat, and the milk from the fourth teat they offer into the fire; on what remains the calf is sustained. He says: "Let so many bulls be slain for the sacrifice, so many bullocks be slain for the sacrifice, so many heifers be slain for the sacrifice, so many goats be slain for the sacrifice, so many rams be slain for the sacrifice, so many horses be slain for the sacrifice, so many trees be felled for the sacrificial post, so much grass be mown for the strewing." And those who are his slaves, his servants, his workmen — they too, driven by the threat of punishment and the threat of fear, faces in tears, weeping, carry out the preparations. Thus a person is both a self-tormentor, given to the practice of tormenting himself, and a tormentor of others, given to the practice of tormenting others.

177. And how is a person one who is neither a self-tormentor, given to the practice of tormenting himself, nor a tormentor of others, given to the practice of tormenting others? He who is no self-tormentor and no tormentor of others dwells, in this very life, without hunger, quenched, become cool, experiencing sukha, having himself become holy. Here a Tathāgata arises in the world, an arahant, a Perfectly Awakened One (sammāsambuddha), accomplished in true knowledge and conduct, fortunate, knower of the world, unsurpassed guide for those to be tamed, teacher of devas and humans, awakened (buddha), blessed (bhagavā). Having realized by his own direct knowledge (abhiññā) this world with its devas, its Māra, its Brahmā, this generation with its ascetics and brāhmaṇas, its devas and humans, he makes it known. He teaches the dhamma, good in the beginning, good in the middle, good in the end, with its meaning and its phrasing; he reveals a holy life (brahmacariya) wholly complete and pure. A householder, or a householder's son, or one reborn in some other clan, hears that dhamma. Having heard the dhamma, he gains saddhā in the Tathāgata. Endowed with that gaining of saddhā, he reflects thus: "Cramped is the household life, a path of dust; the going-forth is the open air. It is not easy, living at home, to lead the holy life utterly complete, utterly pure, polished like a conch. Suppose I were to shave off hair and beard, don the ochre robes, and go forth from home to homelessness." Then, after some time, abandoning a small fortune or a large fortune, abandoning a small circle of relatives or a large circle of relatives, he shaves off hair and beard, dons the ochre robes, and goes forth from home to homelessness.

178. Having thus gone forth, undertaking the training and way of life of the bhikkhus, he abandons the killing of living beings and abstains from killing living beings; with rod and weapon laid down, conscientious, kind, he dwells compassionate toward all living beings. He abandons taking what is not given and abstains from taking what is not given; taking only what is given, expecting only what is given, he dwells in purity, without theft. He abandons unchastity and is celibate (brahmacārī), living apart, abstaining from the common practice of sexual intercourse. He abandons false speech and abstains from false speech; he is a speaker of truth, wedded to truth, reliable, trustworthy, no deceiver of the world. He abandons divisive speech and abstains from divisive speech: having heard something here, he does not repeat it elsewhere to divide these people from those; having heard something there, he does not repeat it here to divide those people from these. Thus a reconciler of the divided, an encourager of the united, delighting in concord, rejoicing in concord, glad in concord, he is a speaker of words that make for concord. He abandons harsh speech and abstains from harsh speech: he speaks such words as are gentle, pleasing to the ear, loveable, going to the heart, courteous, agreeable to many, pleasing to many. He abandons idle chatter and abstains from idle chatter: he speaks at the right time, speaks what is factual, speaks what is good, speaks on the dhamma, speaks on the discipline (vinaya); at the right time he speaks words worth treasuring, reasoned, measured, and beneficial.

179. He abstains from damaging seed-life and plant-life. He eats once a day, refraining from eating at night and abstaining from food at the wrong time. He abstains from dancing, singing, music, and unseemly shows. He abstains from wearing garlands and from beautifying himself with scents and cosmetics. He abstains from high and large beds. He abstains from accepting gold and silver. He abstains from accepting raw grain; from accepting raw meat; from accepting women and girls; from accepting male and female slaves; from accepting goats and sheep; from accepting fowl and pigs; from accepting elephants, cattle, horses, and mares; from accepting fields and lands. He abstains from going on errands and running messages; from buying and selling; from dealings with false weights, false metals, and false measures; from the crooked ways of bribery, deception, and fraud; and from wounding, killing, binding, highway robbery, plunder, and violence.

180. He is content with robes to protect the body and almsfood to sustain the belly; wherever he goes, he sets out taking only these with him. Just as a winged bird, wherever it flies, flies with its wings as its only burden, so too the bhikkhu is content with robes to protect the body and almsfood to sustain the belly; wherever he goes, he sets out taking only these. Endowed with this noble aggregate of sīla (sīlakkhandha), he experiences within himself a blameless sukha.

181. On seeing a form with the eye, he does not grasp at its sign or its features. Since, if he were to dwell with the eye faculty unrestrained, evil unwholesome states of covetousness and grief might invade him, he practices for its restraint, he guards the eye faculty, he undertakes restraint of the eye faculty. On hearing a sound with the ear … on smelling an odor with the nose … on tasting a flavor with the tongue … on touching a tangible with the body … on cognizing a dhamma with the mind, he does not grasp at its sign or its features. Since, if he were to dwell with the mind faculty unrestrained, evil unwholesome states of covetousness and grief might invade him, he practices for its restraint, he guards the mind faculty, he undertakes restraint of the mind faculty. Endowed with this noble restraint of the faculties (indriyasaṃvara), he experiences within himself an unblemished sukha.

182. He acts with sampajañña in going forward and going back; he acts with sampajañña in looking ahead and looking aside; he acts with sampajañña in bending and stretching; he acts with sampajañña in bearing the outer robe, bowl, and robes; he acts with sampajañña in eating, drinking, chewing, and tasting; he acts with sampajañña in defecating and urinating; he acts with sampajañña in walking, standing, sitting, falling asleep, waking, speaking, and keeping silent. Endowed with this noble aggregate of sīla, with this noble restraint of the faculties, with this noble sati and sampajañña, and with this noble contentment, he resorts to a secluded dwelling — a forest, the root of a tree, a mountain, a ravine, a hillside cave, a charnel ground, a jungle thicket, the open air, a heap of straw. After his meal, returning from the alms-round, he sits down, folding his legs crosswise, setting his body erect, and establishing sati before him. Abandoning covetousness for the world, he dwells with a mind free of covetousness; he purifies his mind from covetousness. Abandoning ill will and hatred, he dwells with a mind free of ill will, compassionate toward all living beings; he purifies his mind from ill will and hatred. Abandoning sloth and torpor, he dwells free of sloth and torpor, percipient of light, with sati and sampajāna; he purifies his mind from sloth and torpor. Abandoning restlessness and remorse, he dwells unagitated, with a mind inwardly at peace; he purifies his mind from restlessness and remorse. Abandoning doubt, he dwells having crossed beyond doubt, unperplexed about wholesome states; he purifies his mind from doubt.

183. Having abandoned these five nīvaraṇa (hindrances), defilements of the mind that weaken paññā, then, secluded from sensual pleasures (kāma), secluded from unwholesome states, he enters and dwells in the first jhāna, which has vitakka and vicāra, with pīti and sukha born of seclusion. With the stilling of vitakka and vicāra, he enters and dwells in the second jhāna, which has inner serene confidence and unification of mind, is without vitakka and vicāra, and has pīti and sukha born of samādhi. With the fading away of pīti as well, he dwells in upekkhā, with sati and sampajāna, and experiences sukha with the body; he enters and dwells in the third jhāna, of which the noble ones declare, "He dwells in sukha who has upekkhā and sati." With the abandoning of sukha and the abandoning of dukkha, and with the earlier disappearance of gladness and grief, he enters and dwells in the fourth jhāna, which is neither dukkha nor sukha and has purity of sati through upekkhā (upekkhāsatipārisuddhi). When his mind is thus composed, purified, cleansed, unblemished, rid of defilement, malleable, workable, steady, and attained to imperturbability, he directs it to the knowledge of recollecting past abodes (pubbenivāsānussatiñāṇa). He recollects his manifold past abodes: one birth, two births, three births, four births, five births, ten births, twenty births, thirty births, forty births, fifty births, a hundred births, a thousand births, a hundred thousand births, many aeons of world-contraction, many aeons of world-expansion, many aeons of world-contraction and expansion: "There I was so named, of such a clan, of such an appearance, such was my food, such my experience of sukha and dukkha, such my life's end; and passing away from there, I arose elsewhere; and there too I was so named, of such a clan, of such an appearance, such was my food, such my experience of sukha and dukkha, such my life's end; and passing away from there, I arose here." Thus, with their aspects and particulars, he recollects his manifold past abodes.

184. When his mind is thus composed, purified, cleansed, unblemished, rid of defilement, malleable, workable, steady, and attained to imperturbability, he directs it to the knowledge of the passing away and rebirth of beings. With the divine eye, purified and surpassing the human, he sees beings passing away and being reborn — inferior and superior, fair and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate — and he understands how beings fare according to their kamma: "These beings, alas, who were endowed with bad bodily conduct, bad verbal conduct, and bad mental conduct, revilers of the noble ones, holders of wrong view, undertaking actions out of wrong view, have, with the breakup of the body, after death, been reborn in a state of deprivation, a bad destination, the abyss, hell. But these beings, who were endowed with good bodily conduct, good verbal conduct, and good mental conduct, not revilers of the noble ones, holders of right view, undertaking actions out of right view, have, with the breakup of the body, after death, been reborn in a good destination, a heavenly world." Thus with the divine eye, purified and surpassing the human, he sees beings passing away and being reborn — inferior and superior, fair and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate — and he understands how beings fare according to their kamma.

185. When his mind is thus composed, purified, cleansed, unblemished, rid of defilement, malleable, workable, steady, and attained to imperturbability, he directs it to the knowledge of the destruction of the āsavas. He understands as it really is, "This is dukkha"; he understands as it really is, "This is the origin of dukkha"; he understands as it really is, "This is the cessation of dukkha"; he understands as it really is, "This is the way leading to the cessation of dukkha." He understands as it really is, "These are the āsavas"; he understands as it really is, "This is the origin of the āsavas"; he understands as it really is, "This is the cessation of the āsavas"; he understands as it really is, "This is the way leading to the cessation of the āsavas." Knowing and seeing thus, his mind is liberated from the āsava of sensuality, his mind is liberated from the āsava of being, his mind is liberated from the āsava of avijjā. In liberation there is the knowledge, "It is liberated." He understands: "Birth is destroyed, the holy life has been lived, what had to be done is done, there is no more of this state of being." Thus a person is neither a self-tormentor, given to the practice of tormenting himself, nor a tormentor of others, given to the practice of tormenting others. Being no self-tormentor and no tormentor of others, he dwells, in this very life, without hunger, quenched, become cool, experiencing sukha, having himself become holy.

186. And which person is one with rāga (lust)? The person whose rāga is unabandoned — this is the person called "one with rāga." And which person is one with dosa (hatred)? The person whose dosa is unabandoned — this is the person called "one with dosa." And which person is one with moha (delusion)? The person whose moha is unabandoned — this is the person called "one with moha." And which person is one with māna (conceit)? The person whose māna is unabandoned — this is the person called "one with māna."

187. And how is a person one who gains the inner samatha of mind (cetosamatha) but does not gain the higher-paññā vipassanā of dhammas (adhipaññādhammavipassanā)? Here some person gains the attainments accompanied by rūpa or accompanied by arūpa, but does not gain the lokuttara (supramundane) magga or phala. Thus a person gains the inner samatha of mind but does not gain the higher-paññā vipassanā of dhammas. And how is a person one who gains the higher-paññā vipassanā of dhammas but does not gain the inner samatha of mind? Here some person gains the lokuttara magga or phala, but does not gain the attainments accompanied by rūpa or accompanied by arūpa. Thus a person gains the higher-paññā vipassanā of dhammas but does not gain the inner samatha of mind. And how is a person one who gains both the inner samatha of mind and the higher-paññā vipassanā of dhammas? Here some person gains the attainments accompanied by rūpa or accompanied by arūpa, and also gains the lokuttara magga or phala. Thus a person gains both the inner samatha of mind and the higher-paññā vipassanā of dhammas. And how is a person one who gains neither the inner samatha of mind nor the higher-paññā vipassanā of dhammas? Here some person neither gains the attainments accompanied by rūpa or accompanied by arūpa, nor gains the lokuttara magga or phala. Thus a person gains neither the inner samatha of mind nor the higher-paññā vipassanā of dhammas.

188. And which person is one going with the stream? Here some person indulges in sensual pleasures (kāma) and does evil kamma. This is the person called "one going with the stream." And which person is one going against the stream? Here some person does not indulge in sensual pleasures and does not do evil kamma; even with dukkha, even with grief, his face in tears, weeping, he leads the complete and pure holy life. This is the person called "one going against the stream." And which person is one of steady self? Here some person, with the destruction of the five lower fetters, is of spontaneous birth (opapātika), there attaining parinibbāna, of a nature not to return from that world. This is the person called "one of steady self." And which person is one who has crossed over, gone beyond, the brāhmaṇa standing on dry land? Here some person, with the destruction of the āsavas, enters and dwells in the āsava-free liberation of mind (cetovimutti) and liberation by paññā (paññāvimutti), having realized it for himself by direct knowledge in this very life. This is the person called "one who has crossed over, gone beyond, the brāhmaṇa standing on dry land."

189. And how is a person of little learning and not endowed in respect of his learning? Here some person has little learning — the discourses (sutta), the mixed prose-and-verse (geyya), the expositions (veyyākaraṇa), the verses (gāthā), the inspired utterances (udāna), the thus-said sayings (itivuttaka), the birth-stories (jātaka), the marvels (abbhutadhamma), and the catechisms (vedalla) — and of that little learning he does not understand the meaning, does not understand the dhamma, and does not practice the dhamma in accordance with the dhamma. Thus a person is of little learning and not endowed in respect of his learning. And how is a person of little learning but endowed in respect of his learning? Here some person has little learning — the discourses … the catechisms — yet of that little learning he understands the meaning, understands the dhamma, and practices the dhamma in accordance with the dhamma. Thus a person is of little learning but endowed in respect of his learning. And how is a person of much learning but not endowed in respect of his learning? Here some person has much learning — the discourses … the catechisms — yet of that much learning he does not understand the meaning, does not understand the dhamma, and does not practice the dhamma in accordance with the dhamma. Thus a person is of much learning but not endowed in respect of his learning. And how is a person of much learning and endowed in respect of his learning? Here some person has much learning — the discourses … the catechisms — and of that much learning he understands the meaning, understands the dhamma, and practices the dhamma in accordance with the dhamma. Thus a person is of much learning and endowed in respect of his learning.

190. And which person is the unshakable samaṇa? Here some person, with the destruction of the three fetters, is a sotāpanna, no longer subject to the states of woe, fixed in destiny, bound for awakening. This is the person called "the unshakable samaṇa." And which person is the lotus samaṇa? Here some person, with the destruction of the three fetters and the attenuation of rāga, dosa, and moha, is a sakadāgāmī, who, returning to this world only once, makes an end of dukkha. This is the person called "the lotus samaṇa." And which person is the white-lotus samaṇa? Here some person, with the destruction of the five lower fetters, is of spontaneous birth (opapātika), there attaining parinibbāna, of a nature not to return from that world. This is the person called "the white-lotus samaṇa." And which person is the exquisite samaṇa among samaṇas? Here some person, with the destruction of the āsavas, enters and dwells in the āsava-free liberation of mind (cetovimutti) and liberation by paññā (paññāvimutti), having realized it for himself by direct knowledge in this very life. This is the person called "the exquisite samaṇa among samaṇas."
