PASSAGE sn35.95 | SN 35.95 | Mālukyaputtasutta

1.2	PALI: “sādhu me, bhante, bhagavā saṅkhittena dhammaṁ desetu, yamahaṁ bhagavato dhammaṁ sutvā eko vūpakaṭṭho appamatto ātāpī pahitatto vihareyyan”ti.
	EN:   “Sir, may the Buddha please teach me Dhamma in brief. When I’ve heard it, I’ll live alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute.”
10.1	PALI: “Ettha ca te, mālukyaputta, diṭṭhasutamutaviññātabbesu dhammesu diṭṭhe diṭṭhamattaṁ bhavissati, sute sutamattaṁ bhavissati, mute mutamattaṁ bhavissati, viññāte viññātamattaṁ bhavissati.
	EN:   “In that case, when it comes to things that ought be seen, heard, thought, and known: in the seen will be merely the seen; in the heard will be merely the heard; in the thought will be merely the thought; in the known will be merely the known.
10.2	PALI: Yato kho te, mālukyaputta, diṭṭhasutamutaviññātabbesu dhammesu diṭṭhe diṭṭhamattaṁ bhavissati, sute sutamattaṁ bhavissati, mute mutamattaṁ bhavissati, viññāte viññātamattaṁ bhavissati;
	EN:   When this is the case,
11.1	PALI: “Imassa khvāhaṁ, bhante, bhagavatā saṅkhittena bhāsitassa vitthārena atthaṁ ājānāmi:
	EN:   “This is how I understand the detailed meaning of the Buddha’s brief statement:
36.1	PALI: Imassa khvāhaṁ, bhante, bhagavatā saṅkhittena bhāsitassa evaṁ vitthārena atthaṁ ājānāmī”ti.
	EN:   That’s how I understand the detailed meaning of the Buddha’s brief statement.”
36.3	PALI: Sādhu kho tvaṁ, mālukyaputta, mayā saṅkhittena bhāsitassa vitthārena atthaṁ ājānāsi:
	EN:   It’s good that you understand the detailed meaning of what I’ve said in brief like this.” And he repeated the verses in full.
41.1	PALI: Imassa kho, mālukyaputta, mayā saṅkhittena bhāsitassa evaṁ vitthārena attho daṭṭhabbo”ti.
	EN:   “This is how to understand the detailed meaning of what I said in brief.”
42.2	PALI: Atha kho āyasmā mālukyaputto eko vūpakaṭṭho appamatto ātāpī pahitatto viharanto nacirasseva—yassatthāya kulaputtā sammadeva agārasmā anagāriyaṁ pabbajanti, tadanuttaraṁ—brahmacariyapariyosānaṁ diṭṭheva dhamme sayaṁ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja vihāsi.
	EN:   Then Māluṅkyaputta, living alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute, soon realized the supreme end of the spiritual path in this very life. He lived having achieved with his own insight the goal for which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness.
42.4	PALI: Aññataro ca panāyasmā mālukyaputto arahataṁ ahosīti.
	EN:   And Venerable Māluṅkyaputta became one of the perfected.
