PASSAGE mn26 | MN 26 | Pāsarāsisutta

20.6	PALI: Santi sattā apparajakkhajātikā, assavanatā dhammassa parihāyanti.
	EN:   There are beings with little dust in their eyes. They’re in decline because they haven’t heard the teaching.
21.2	PALI: Addasaṁ kho ahaṁ, bhikkhave, buddhacakkhunā lokaṁ volokento satte apparajakkhe mahārajakkhe, tikkhindriye mudindriye, svākāre dvākāre, suviññāpaye duviññāpaye, appekacce paralokavajjabhayadassāvine viharante, appekacce na paralokavajjabhayadassāvine viharante.
	EN:   And I saw sentient beings with little dust in their eyes, and some with much dust in their eyes; with keen faculties and with weak faculties, with good qualities and with bad qualities, easy to teach and hard to teach. And some of them lived seeing the danger in the fault to do with the next world, while others did not.
21.3	PALI: Seyyathāpi nāma uppaliniyaṁ vā paduminiyaṁ vā puṇḍarīkiniyaṁ vā appekaccāni uppalāni vā padumāni vā puṇḍarīkāni vā udake jātāni udake saṁvaḍḍhāni udakānuggatāni antonimuggaposīni, appekaccāni uppalāni vā padumāni vā puṇḍarīkāni vā udake jātāni udake saṁvaḍḍhāni udakānuggatāni samodakaṁ ṭhitāni, appekaccāni uppalāni vā padumāni vā puṇḍarīkāni vā udake jātāni udake saṁvaḍḍhāni udakaṁ accuggamma ṭhitāni anupalittāni udakena;
	EN:   It’s like a pool with blue water lilies, or pink or white lotuses. Some of them sprout and grow in the water without rising above it, thriving underwater. Some of them sprout and grow in the water reaching the water’s surface. And some of them sprout and grow in the water but rise up above the water and stand with no water clinging to them.
21.4	PALI: evameva kho ahaṁ, bhikkhave, buddhacakkhunā lokaṁ volokento addasaṁ satte apparajakkhe mahārajakkhe, tikkhindriye mudindriye, svākāre dvākāre, suviññāpaye duviññāpaye, appekacce paralokavajjabhayadassāvine viharante, appekacce na paralokavajjabhayadassāvine viharante.
	EN:   In the same way, I saw sentient beings with little dust in their eyes, and some with much dust in their eyes.
22.5	PALI: ‘ayaṁ kho āḷāro kālāmo paṇḍito viyatto medhāvī dīgharattaṁ apparajakkhajātiko.
	EN:   ‘That Āḷāra Kālāma is astute, competent, clever, and has long had little dust in his eyes.
23.5	PALI: ‘ayaṁ kho udako rāmaputto paṇḍito viyatto medhāvī dīgharattaṁ apparajakkhajātiko.
	EN:   ‘That Uddaka son of Rāma is astute, competent, clever, and has long had little dust in his eyes.
